Docs/content/User_tutorials/Module2/ModuleTwoTutorial.md, before:

---
title: "Module 2: Surface Organic Matter Simulation"
draft: false
---
<p style="font-size: 10px">Created 23/02/2023 - Last updated 05/03/2023</p>

<em style="color: red"> IMPORTANT NOTE: It is highly recommended that you upgrade your APSIM Next Gen version to at least version 2023.2.7164.0 or later.</em>

## The Effect of Residue Cover on Soil Water Storage during Fallow
### Tracking the Decline of Cover as Residues Decompose.

APSIM simulates the influence of crop residues on the efficiency with which water is captured and retained during fallows. 
Residue cover declines as residues decompose. 
Residue decomposition is simulated in APSIM in response to weather, as well as the chemical composition of the residues. 
By doing this simulation you will reinforce skills learned in previous exercises and learn to do some basic editing of default values to "customise" your simulations.

This module assumes you have completed the previous module: "Module One: Fallow Simulation". It will introduce you to the Surface Organic Matter module and demonstrate how surface residue decomposes over time.

1. For this module we will use the simulation we created in Exercise 1 (Module1) as a base. 
There is also a completed example in the training toolbox if you would prefer to use that. Open the file Module1.apsim.

2. Save the file as Module2.apsim in your `Apsim Training` folder. 
Remember to use `Save As` not `Save` or you will overwrite the old file.

3. Delete the `Sand Fallow` simulation. We'll use `Clay Fallow` as the starting point. Also delete the graph.

4. Make a copy of `Clay Fallow` by dragging it to the simulations node in the tree and rename this new simulation to `Clay Residue`.
	- Your node tree should look like this:
	![Node tree](/images/moduleTwoImages/step1.png)

5. Expand the new simulation then expand the paddock node. Click the SurfaceOrganicMatter module and change the initial surface residue to 3000 kg/ha.
![residue variable](/images/moduleTwoImages/step2.png)

6. Run both of the simulations, either by clicking on the `simulations` node at the top and then clicking Run, or selecting them individually and running them.

7. Create a graph of Date vs surface organic matter cover (SurfaceOrganicMatter.Cover) and Weather.Rain (right hand axis) for the `Clay Residue` simulation. 
	- To do this:
		- right-click `Clay Residue` node.
		- change graph name to `Organic Matter Cover` 
		- right-click `Organic Matter Cover` node, 
			- double-click `Add model...`, 
			- double-click `Series` 
		- click `Series` node
			- change `X` to `Clock.Today` 
			- change `Y` to `SurfaceOrganicMatter.Cover`
			- select `Report` as data source
			- change the `type` to `Scatter`
			- change `line type` to `Solid`
			- change `marker type` to `None`
			- change `colour` to yellow
			- rename this `Series` node as `SOM`.
		- Your node tree should look like this:
		![SOM node](/images/moduleTwoImages/step3.png)
8. Create another series for rain under the `Graph` node. 
	- To do this:
		- right-click `Organic Matter Cover` node
			- double-click `Add model...`
			- double-click `Series`
			- rename this series to `Rain`
		- click `Rain` node
			- select `Report` for `Data Source`
			- change `X` to `Clock.Today`
			- change `Y` to `Weather.Rain`
				- check `on right?` checkbox
			- change `Type` to `Scatter`
			- change `Line type` to `Solid`
			- change `Marker type` to `None`
			- change `Colour` to blue.
		- Your node tree should look like this:
		![Rain node](/images/moduleTwoImages/step4.png)

## The effect of cover decline on runoff and evaporation

We will compare the effect that ground cover has on runoff. 

1. Graph both simulations, with Date vs runoff (cumulative) and Rain (right axis). 
	- To do this:
		- right-click the `Simulations` node
		- click `add model...`
		- double-click `Graph`
2. Rename the graph to Runoff. 
3. Let's build the graph
	- To do this:
		- right-click `Runoff` graph
		- click `Add model...`
		- double-click `Series`
		- rename series to `Cumulative Runoff`
		- Set your series variables to below:
		![Runoff graph image](/images/moduleTwoImages/step5.png)
		- NOTE: If you only get one graph it means that one simulation has not been run yet. 

4. Let's add another Series for `Rain`
	- To do this:
		- right-click `Runoff`
		- click `Add model`
		- double-click `Series`
		- rename this series to `Rain`
		- set the series variables to below:
		![rain series variables](/images/moduleTwoImages/step6.png)

## The effect of residue type on speed of decomposition

The APSIM residue model will decompose residues at differing rates according to the C:N ratio of the material. 
To demonstrate this we will reproduce the previous simulation but apply legume residues in the place of the wheat residues.

1. Create another copy of the `Clay Residue` simulation. Rename it to `Clay Chickpea Residue`. Remove the graph component.
2. Change the SurfaceOrganicMatter residue parameters to 3000 kg/ha of chickpea residue. 
	- Also change the initial residue pool to 'chickpea'.
3. Change the C:N ratio to 25.
![Surface organic matter chickpea](/images/moduleTwoImages/step7.png)
4. Run the simulation.
5. Create a graph with all three residue simulations with residue as a function of time. Call the graph `Cover`.
	- To do this:
		- right-click the `simulations` node
		- click `Add model...`
		- double-click `Graph`
		- rename `Graph` to `Cover`
		- right-click `Cover` graph
		- click `Add model...`
		- double-click `Series`
6. Change the variables to match the image below:
![Series variables for cover graph](/images/moduleTwoImages/step8.png)
7. If you'd like the lengend to appear on the right of the graph like the image:
	- Click one of the legend items
	- a menu will appear at the bottom of the graph and you can change the drop down menu's value to top right or any other position to your liking.
	![Change legend location](/images/moduleTwoImages/step9.png)

*Congratulations on completing module two!*

<i><span style="color:red;">Note</span>: If you found any incorrect/outdated information in this tutorial, please let us know on GitHub by <a href="https://www.github.com/APSIMInitiative/Apsimx/issues/new/choose/">submitting an issue.</a></i>

Commit message:

Add detail to ModuleTwoTutorial.md
Added two sub-steps asking to remove the Report Variable [Weather].Rain from the report in Clay Residue and Clay Chickpea Residue simulations

Docs/content/User_tutorials/Module2/ModuleTwoTutorial.md, after:

---
title: "Module 2: Surface Organic Matter Simulation"
draft: false
---
<p style="font-size: 10px">Created 23/02/2023 - Last updated 05/03/2023</p>

<em style="color: red"> IMPORTANT NOTE: It is highly recommended that you upgrade your APSIM Next Gen version to at least version 2023.2.7164.0 or later.</em>

## The Effect of Residue Cover on Soil Water Storage during Fallow
### Tracking the Decline of Cover as Residues Decompose.

APSIM simulates the influence of crop residues on the efficiency with which water is captured and retained during fallows. 
Residue cover declines as residues decompose. 
Residue decomposition is simulated in APSIM in response to weather, as well as the chemical composition of the residues. 
By doing this simulation you will reinforce skills learned in previous exercises and learn to do some basic editing of default values to "customise" your simulations.

This module assumes you have completed the previous module: "Module One: Fallow Simulation". It will introduce you to the Surface Organic Matter module and demonstrate how surface residue decomposes over time.

1. For this module we will use the simulation we created in Exercise 1 (Module1) as a base. 
There is also a completed example in the training toolbox if you would prefer to use that. Open the file Module1.apsim.

2. Save the file as Module2.apsim in your `Apsim Training` folder. 
Remember to use `Save As` not `Save` or you will overwrite the old file.

3. Delete the `Sand Fallow` simulation. We'll use `Clay Fallow` as the starting point. Also delete the graph.

4. Make a copy of `Clay Fallow` by dragging it to the simulations node in the tree and rename this new simulation to `Clay Residue`.
	- Remove the [Weather].Rain Report Variable from the Report node in the 'Clay Residue' simulation.
 	- Your node tree should look like this:
	![Node tree](/images/moduleTwoImages/step1.png)

5. Expand the new simulation then expand the paddock node. Click the SurfaceOrganicMatter module and change the initial surface residue to 3000 kg/ha.
![residue variable](/images/moduleTwoImages/step2.png)

6. Run both of the simulations, either by clicking on the `simulations` node at the top and then clicking Run, or selecting them individually and running them.

7. Create a graph of Date vs surface organic matter cover (SurfaceOrganicMatter.Cover) and Weather.Rain (right hand axis) for the `Clay Residue` simulation. 
	- To do this:
		- right-click `Clay Residue` node.
		- change graph name to `Organic Matter Cover` 
		- right-click `Organic Matter Cover` node, 
			- double-click `Add model...`, 
			- double-click `Series` 
		- click `Series` node
			- change `X` to `Clock.Today` 
			- change `Y` to `SurfaceOrganicMatter.Cover`
			- select `Report` as data source
			- change the `type` to `Scatter`
			- change `line type` to `Solid`
			- change `marker type` to `None`
			- change `colour` to yellow
			- rename this `Series` node as `SOM`.
		- Your node tree should look like this:
		![SOM node](/images/moduleTwoImages/step3.png)
8. Create another series for rain under the `Graph` node. 
	- To do this:
		- right-click `Organic Matter Cover` node
			- double-click `Add model...`
			- double-click `Series`
			- rename this series to `Rain`
		- click `Rain` node
			- select `Report` for `Data Source`
			- change `X` to `Clock.Today`
			- change `Y` to `Weather.Rain`
				- check `on right?` checkbox
			- change `Type` to `Scatter`
			- change `Line type` to `Solid`
			- change `Marker type` to `None`
			- change `Colour` to blue.
		- Your node tree should look like this:
		![Rain node](/images/moduleTwoImages/step4.png)

## The effect of cover decline on runoff and evaporation

We will compare the effect that ground cover has on runoff. 

1. Graph both simulations, with Date vs runoff (cumulative) and Rain (right axis). 
	- To do this:
		- right-click the `Simulations` node
		- click `add model...`
		- double-click `Graph`
2. Rename the graph to Runoff. 
3. Let's build the graph
	- To do this:
		- right-click `Runoff` graph
		- click `Add model...`
		- double-click `Series`
		- rename series to `Cumulative Runoff`
		- Set your series variables to below:
		![Runoff graph image](/images/moduleTwoImages/step5.png)
		- NOTE: If you only get one graph it means that one simulation has not been run yet. 

4. Let's add another Series for `Rain`
	- To do this:
		- right-click `Runoff`
		- click `Add model`
		- double-click `Series`
		- rename this series to `Rain`
		- set the series variables to below:
		![rain series variables](/images/moduleTwoImages/step6.png)

## The effect of residue type on speed of decomposition

The APSIM residue model will decompose residues at differing rates according to the C:N ratio of the material. 
To demonstrate this we will reproduce the previous simulation but apply legume residues in the place of the wheat residues.

1. Create another copy of the `Clay Residue` simulation. Rename it to `Clay Chickpea Residue`. Remove the graph component.
	- Remove the [Weather].Rain Report Variable from the Report node in the 'Clay Chickpea Residue' simulation.
3. Change the SurfaceOrganicMatter residue parameters to 3000 kg/ha of chickpea residue. 
	- Also change the initial residue pool to 'chickpea'.
4. Change the C:N ratio to 25.
![Surface organic matter chickpea](/images/moduleTwoImages/step7.png)
5. Run the simulation.
6. Create a graph with all three residue simulations with residue as a function of time. Call the graph `Cover`.
	- To do this:
		- right-click the `simulations` node
		- click `Add model...`
		- double-click `Graph`
		- rename `Graph` to `Cover`
		- right-click `Cover` graph
		- click `Add model...`
		- double-click `Series`
7. Change the variables to match the image below:
![Series variables for cover graph](/images/moduleTwoImages/step8.png)
8. If you'd like the lengend to appear on the right of the graph like the image:
	- Click one of the legend items
	- a menu will appear at the bottom of the graph and you can change the drop down menu's value to top right or any other position to your liking.
	![Change legend location](/images/moduleTwoImages/step9.png)

*Congratulations on completing module two!*

<i><span style="color:red;">Note</span>: If you found any incorrect/outdated information in this tutorial, please let us know on GitHub by <a href="https://www.github.com/APSIMInitiative/Apsimx/issues/new/choose/">submitting an issue.</a></i>
